# The_Aura_of_CO2

The Aura of CO2 is a device that monitors the quantity of Carbon Dioxide,CO2 in your environment. It utilises a MQ135 gas sensor which has a Tin conductor that changes resistance when it is in the presence of different gasses. The initial resistance of the metal(Rzero) is first calculated for calibration. The resistance across the metal in different environments is detected to obtain the parts per million(PPM) value of Carbon Dioxide which shows the amount of carbon dioxide in the environment. A healthy range of Carbon Dioxide is 100 - 600 ppm and anything above 1000ppm is alarming! I also had to leave the sensor running for 12 hours to burn the metal so that it is ready for its sensing endeavours!

Another functionality I thought was useful was the addition of the Temperature and Humidity sensor. The initial inspiration was the MQ135 gas sensor library has a function with optional parameters of temperature and humidity to get more accurate PPM readings. However, displaying the current temperature and humidity on the project itself has turned out to be an awesome component of the project. I used the DHT22 together with the DHT.t library to obtain the temperature and humidity.

Who’s the mastermind behind this? The heart of the project is the Arduino Nano which receives analog input from the MQ135 and digital input from the DHT22 and calculated the signals into data goodness which is then sent to the output. There is an if condition which checks if the CO2 PPM value exceeds 1000 PPM which is dangerous and a siren consisting of red light and a buzzer are triggered which alerts nearby people. The Arduino functions according to my code in the C++ language and is uploaded to the board. In the code, I defined the libraries that I used to calculate sensor data and control the OLED display. I also defined a few variables and provided the information required by the library objects based on their datasheet. The main function is a void loop which repeats itself every 5 seconds to obtain the latest sensor data while still providing sufficient time to sensors for detection and ensuring optimal power consumption.

Where does all the data go? The data is then conveniently displayed on an OLED screen on the project itself. The Arduino Nano communicated with the OLED screen through the I2C protocol. While creating this project, I was extremely fascinated by I2C and decided to dive much deeper into research and write this [article](https://medium.com/@imhays287/the-wonders-of-i2c-e4604fbfa2ed). I used the Adafruit_GFX.h and Adafruit_SSD1306.h to design a minimalistic layout to display the temperature, humidity and CO2 quantity. I even used the ASCII chart to print out the symbol of degree in temperature which has an ASCII value of 167. The Wire.h library handles the I2C communication with the OLED display.

I also spent a lot of time researching power delivery. The project uses a 12v dc power adapter which is directly plugged into the wall. This is coupled with a 7805 voltage regulator and capacitor to obtain a smooth 5v dc voltage. This is perfect to sustainably power the project 24/7. One of the challenges was to reduce the number of wires, as they amounted to messy and horrifying forests of cables. With more tweaking and better design, I was able to reduce the number of wires to the bare minimum with more effective connections.

In a nutshell, The Aura of CO2 is a mini-device that is able to run 24/7 to display the Temperature, Humidity and CO2 quantity of the current surrounding atmosphere.
